Open your ears,
for which of you will stop thevent of hearing
when loud rumor speaks?
I, from the orient to thedrooping west,
making the wind my post-horse,
still unfold the acts commencedon this ball of earth.
I run before King Harry'svictory,
who, in a bloody field byShrewsbury,
hath beaten down young Hotspurand his troops,
quenching the flame of boldrebellion
even with the rebel's blood.
But what mean I to speak so trueat first?
My office is to noise abroadthat Harry Monmouth fell
under the wrath of nobleHotspur's sword,
and that the king, before theDouglas' rage,
stooped his anointed head as lowas death.
This have I rumored through thepeasant towns
between that royal field ofShrewsbury
and this worm-eaten hold ofragged stone,
where Hotspur's father, oldNorthumberland,
lies crafty-sick.
The posts come tiring on...
and not a man of them bringsother news
than they have learnt of me.
From rumor's tongues,
they bring smooth comfortsfalse,
worse than true wrongs.
What news, Lord Bardolph?
Every minute now should be thefather of some stratagem.
The times are wild.
Contention, like a horse full ofhigh feeding,
madly hath broke loose and bearsdown all before him.
Noble earl, I bring you certainnews from Shrewsbury.
Good, an God will.
As good as heart can wish.
The king is almost wounded tothe death,
and, in the fortune of my lordyour son,
Prince Harry slain.
But how was this derived?
Saw you the field?
Came you from Shrewsbury?
I spake with one, my lord, thatcame from thence,
a gentleman well bred and ofgood name,
who freely rendered me thesenews for true.
My lord, a gentleman almostforspent with speed,
stopped hard by me to breathehis bloodied horse.
He asked the way to Chester,
and of him I did demand whatnews from Shrewsbury.
He told me that rebellion hadbad luck,
and that young Harry Percy'sspur was cold.
My lord, I'll tell you what.
If my young lord your son havenot the day,
upon mine honor,
for a silken point I'll give mybarony.
Never talk of it.
My Lord, I spakeó
Speak not of that you do notknow.
Yea, this man's brow, like to atitle piece,
foretells the nature of a tragicvolume.
Say, Morton, didst thou comefrom Shrewsbury?
I ran from Shrewsbury, my noblelord,
where hateful death put on hisugliest mask
to fright our party.
And how doth my son and brother?
Thou tremblest.
The whiteness in thy cheek
is apter than thy tongue to tellthy errand.
Douglas is living,
and your brother, yet.
But, for my lord your sonó
Why, he is dead.
See what a ready tonguesuspicion hath.
I cannot think, my lord, yourson is dead.
I am sorry I should force you tobelieve
that which I would to God I hadnot seen.
But these mine eyes saw him inbloody state,
rendering faint quittance,
wearied and out-breathed toHarry Monmouth,
whose swift wrath beat down
the never daunted Percy to theearth,
from whence with life he nevermore sprung up.
For this I shall have timeenough to mourn.
In poison there is physic.
and these news, having beenwell,
that would have made me sick,
being sick, have in some measuremade me well.
Now bind my brows with iron
and approach the ragged'st hourthat time and spite dare bring
to frown upon the enragedNorthumberland.
Let heaven kiss earth.
Let not nature's hand keep thewild flood confined.
Let order die.
And let this world no longer bea stage
to feed contention in alingering act.
But let one spirit of thefirstborn Cain
reign in all bosoms,
that each heart, being set onbloody courses,
the rude scene may end,
and darkness be the burier ofthe dead.
This strained passion doth youwrong, my lord.
We all that are engaged to thisloss
knew that we ventured on suchdangerous seas
that if we wrought our life'twas ten to one.
And yet we ventured,
for the gain proposed choked therespect of likely peril feared.
And since we are o'erset,venture again.
Come.
We will all put forth body andgoods.
'Tis more than time.
And, my most noble lord, I hearfor certain
and dare speak the truth,
the gentle archbishop of York isup with well-appointed powers.
He turns insurrection toreligion.
Supposed sincere and holy in histhoughts,
he's followed both with body andwith mind
and doth enlarge his rising withthe blood of fair King Richard,
scraped from Pomfret stones;
derives from heaven his quarreland his cause;
tells them he doth bestride ableeding land
gasping for life under greatBolingbroke.
And more and less do flock tofollow him.
I knew of this before, but, tospeak truth,
this present grief had wiped itfrom my mind.
Go in with me and counsel everyman
the aptest way for safety andrevenge.
Sirrah, you giant,
what says the doctor to mywater?
He said, sir, the water itself
was a good, clean, healthywater.
But for the party that owed it,
he might have more diseases thanhe knew for.
Men of all sorts take a pride togird at me.
The brain of this foolishcompounded clay, man,
is not able to invent anythingthat tends to laughter,
more than I invent or isinvented on me.
I'm not only witty in myself,
but the cause that wit is inother men.
I do here walk before thee likea sow
that has overwhelmed all herlitter but one.
If the prince put thee into myservice
for any other reason than to setme off,
why, then I have no judgment.
Thou whoreson mandrake.
Thou art fitter to be worn in mycap
than to wait at my heels.
What said Master Dombledon
about the satin for my shortcloak and my slops?
He said, sir, you should procurehim
better assurance than Bardolph.
He would not take his band noryours.
He liked not the security.
A whoreson Achitophel.
A rascally yea-forsooth knave
to bear a gentleman in hand andthen stand upon security.
I had as lief they'd putratsbane in my mouth
as offer to stop it withsecurity.
Where is Bardolph?
He's gone into Smithfield to buyyour worship a horse.
I bought him in Paul's.
He'll buy me a horse inSmithfield.
An I could get me but a wife inthe stews,
I were manned, horsed, andwived.
Sir, here comes that nobleman
that committed the prince forstriking him about Bardolph.
Wait, close.
I will not see him.
What's he that goes there?
Falstaff, an't please yourlordship.
He that was in question for therobbery?
He, my lord.
But he hath since done goodservice at Shrewsbury,
and, as I hear,
is now going with some charge tothe Lord John of Lancaster.
What, to York?
Call him back again.
Sir John Falstaff.
Boy, tell him I'm deaf.
You will have to speak louder.
My master is deaf.
I'm sure he isó
to the hearing of anything good.
Go pluck him by the elbow.
I must speak with him.
Sir John.
What?
A young knave, and begging?
Is there not wars?
Is there not employment?
Sir, my lord would speak withyou.
Sir John Falstaff, a word withyou.
Oh, my lord.
God give your lordship good timeof day.
I am glad to see Your Lordshipabroad.
I heard say your lordship wassick.
I hope your lordship goes abroadby advice.
Your lordship, though not cleanpast your youth,
hath yet some smack of age inyou,
some relish of the saltness oftime,
and I must humbly beseech yourlordship
to have a reverent care of yourhealth.
Sir John, I sent for you
before your expedition toShrewsbury.
An't please your lordship,
I hear that His Majesty isreturned
with some discomfort from Wales.
I talk not of His Majesty.
You would not come when I sentfor you.
And I hear, moreover, that HisHighness is fallen
into this same whoresonapoplexy.
Well, God mend him.
I pray you, let me speak withyou.
This apoplexy, as I take it,
is a kind of lethargy, an'tplease your lordship,
a kind of sleeping in the blood,
a whoreson tingling.
What tell you me of it?
Be it as it is.
It hath its original from muchgrief,
from study and perturbation ofthe brain.
I have read the cause of hiseffects in Galen.
It's a kind of deafness.
I think you are fallen into thedisease.
You hear not what I say to you.
Oh, very well, my lord; verywell.
Rather, an't please you, it'sthe disease of not listening,
the malady of not marking, thatI am troubled withal.
To punish you by the heels
would amend the attention ofyour ears.
And I care not if I do becomeyour physician.
I sent for you
when there were matters againstyou for your life.
As I was then advised by mylearned counsel,
I did not come.
Well, the truth is, Sir John,you live in great infamy.
He that buckles him in my beltcannot live in less.
Your means are very slender, andyour waste is great.
I would it were otherwise.
I would my means were greaterand my waist slenderer.
You have misled the youthfulprince.
The young prince hath misled me.
I am the fellow with the greatbelly,
and he my dog.
Well, I am loath to gall a newhealed wound.
Your day's service at Shrewsburyhath a little gilded over
your night's exploit atGadshill.
But since all is well, keep itso.
You follow the young prince upand down like his ill angel.
Not so, my lord.
You that are old consider not
the capacities of us that areyoung.
Will you set your name down inthe scroll of youth
that are written down old withall the characters of age?
Have you not a moist eye,
a dry hand,
a yellow cheek,
a white beard,
a decreasing leg,
an increasing belly?
Is not your voice broken,
your wind short,
your chin double,
your wit single,
and every part about you blastedwith antiquity?
And yet will you call yourselfyoung?
Fie, fie, fie, Sir John.
My lord, I was born at about3:00 in the afternoon
with a white head and somethingof a round belly.
For my voice,
I have lost it with halloing andsinging of anthems.
The truth is, I'm only old injudgment and understanding.
And he that will caper with mefor 1,000 marks,
would him lend me the money andhave at him.
For the box of the ear that theprince gave you,
he gave it like a rude prince,
and you took it like a sensiblelord.
I have chequed him for it, andthe young lion repents.
Marry, not in ashes andsackcloth,
but in new silk and old sack.
Well, God send the prince abetter companion.
God send the companion a betterprince.
I cannot rid my hands of him.
Well, the king hath severed you.
I hear you are going with LordJohn of Lancaster
against the archbishop and theearl of Northumberland.
Yea, I thank your pretty sweetwit for it.
But look you pray, all you thatkiss my lady peace at home,
that our armies meet not in ahot day,
for, by the Lord, I take but twoshirts out with me,
and I mean not to sweatextraordinarily.
There is not a dangerous actioncan peep out his head
but I am thrust upon it.
Well, I cannot last ever.
but it was alway yet the trickof our English nation,
if they have a good thing, tomake it too common.
If ye will needs say I'm an oldman,
you should give me rest.
I would to God my name were not
so terrible to the enemy as itis.
I were better to be eaten todeath with a rust
than to be scoured to nothingwith perpetual motion.
Well, be honest, be honest,
and God bless your expedition.
Will your lordship lend me£1,000 to furnish me forth?
Not a penny; not a penny.
Fare you well.
Commend me to my cousinWestmoreland.
If I do, fillip me with athree-man beetle.
Boy, what money's in my purse?
Seven groats and two pence.
I can get no remedy against thisconsumption of the purse.
Borrowing only lingers andlingers it out,
but the disease is incurable.
Go bear this letter to my lordof Lancaster,
this to the prince,
this to the earl ofWestmoreland,
and this to old mistress Ursula,
whom I have weekly sworn tomarry
since I perceived the firstwhite hair on my chin.
About it.
You know where to find me.
A pox of this gout or a gout ofthis pox,
for the one or the other playsthe rogue with my great toe.
Well, 'tis no matter if I dohalt.
I have the wars for my color,
and my pension shall seem themore reasonable.
A good wit will make use ofanything.
I will turn diseases tocommodity.
Thus have you heard our causeand known our means.
My most noble friends, I prayyou all,
speak plainly your opinions ofour hopes.
Our present musters grow uponthe file
to 25,000 men of choice,
and our supplies live largely
in the hopes of greatNorthumberland,
whose bosom burns with anincensed fire of injuries.
The question then, LordHastings, standeth thus:
whether our present 25,000
may hold up head withoutNorthumberland?
With him, we may.
Aye, marry, there's the point.
But if without him we be thoughttoo feeble,
my judgment is, we should notstep too far
till we had his assistance bythe hand.
For in a theme so bloody facedas this,
conjecture, expectation, andsurmise of aids incertain
should not be admitted.
Very true, Lord Bardolph,
for indeed it was youngHotspur's case at Shrewsbury.
It was, my lord, who linedhimself with hopes,
eating the air on promise ofsupply,
flattering himself in project ofa power
much smaller than the smallestof his thoughts.
And so with great imaginationproper to madmen,
led his powers to death andwinking leaped into destruction.
But, by your leave, it never yetdid hurt
to lay down likelihoods andforms of hope.
I think we are a body strongenough,
even as we are, to equal withthe king.
What, is the king but 25,000?
To us no more.
Nay, not so much, Lord Bardolph.
For his divisions, as the timesdo brawl,
Are in three heads:
one power against the French andone against Glendower,
perforce the third must take upus.
So is the unfirm king in threedivided,
and his coffers sound withhollow poverty and emptiness.
That he should draw his severalstrengths together
and come against us in fullpuissance,
need not be dreaded.
Let us on and publish theoccasion of our arms.
The commonwealth is sick oftheir own choice.
Their overgreedy love hathsurfeited.
They that when Richard livedwould have him die
are now become enamored on hisgrave.
Thou that threw'st dust upon hisgoodly head
when through proud London hecame sighing on
after the admired heels ofBolingbroke.
Shall we go draw our numbers andset on?
We are time's subjects, and timebids be gone.